---
layout: post
title: Fantastic Future by Elon Musk
location: Bangkok, Thailand
excerpt: On a recent flight I read the book "Elon Musk Tesla, SpaceX, and the Quest for a Fantastic Future" by Ashlee Vance. I haven't met Elon yet, but I have talked to a few people close to him and the qualities portrayed in this book are all true.
image: /blog/images/elon_musk.jpg
---

On a recent flight I read the book "Elon Musk: Tesla, SpaceX, and the Quest for a Fantastic Future" by Ashlee Vance. I haven't met Elon yet, but I have talked to a few people close to him and the qualities portrayed in this book are all true.

The book doesn't have a lot of interviews with Elon himself or recounts from internal events at Tesla or SpaceX, even though he had agreed to be interviewed and to comment on the accounts provided by others. Most of it is just stories about events as they unfolded and what some people thought about them. I wish it had more detail, especially in what went down at PayPal and during the near-bankruptcy times of both of his new companies. However, it reads like a novel at some points, especially the stories of the SpaceX start. You could jump from reading the Martian and back to this book and you wouldn't be able to tell the difference. That's how incredible most of the stories are, especially knowing that in the end they worked out and it wasn't all just a waste.

I have talked about this many times before, about the amount of people following [conventional wisdom](/blog/i-make-enterprise-software.html), doing things out of the inertia generated by an industry. After studying what Elon Musk did I know I'm not the only one thinking about it. SpaceX is especially a great example of execution disrupting a stable industry. Doing things cheaper, faster and better. All while bystanders are saying how none of this will work, yes it was a gamble, but it did work. NBC this week commented on how Netflix is nothing more than a fad and traditional TV is still doing great. Sure, for the next few years. But broadly denying Netflix-like content creators are destroying TV is ridiculous.

Conventional wisdom in the US was that cars can only be sold through dealerships. This made no sense for Tesla and thus they continue to fight various states to make it legal for them to sell cars themselves. To this day most people don't question why they can't just order any car they want online. I have driven Tesla cars many times and I think [they are great](/blog/the-ludicrous-tesla.html) - if I wasn't living in NYC, which is impractical for a car, I would probably get one. It's not a revolutionary concept - Tesla did not come up with the concept of an electric car - but they were the only ones who got it right.

It would be impossible to build these companies without great people. It looks like this is something Elon got right very early on and focused on building an A-team. Most of the first few hundreds of employees, in the end, were all interviewed by Elon himself. Of course it is hard to talk about teams without remembering all the people that got kicked out of the boat.

A big part of the book explores Elon's ego and what impact it had on his ventures. There was a similar focus in Steve Jobs' biographies as well. But while everyone started researching the insides of Apple only after Steve had passed away, Elon is experiencing it right now. But as the book uncovers, and as something I always believed to be true, ego is an integral part of both Apple and Tesla. Elon wasn't a hired MBA brought in to manage a growing company - he built that company the way he thought best. So it's no surprise to see people get hurt in altercations - they are not on the same level of involvement as Elon is. Sure, some people lost their jobs or had stress levels way beyond comfortable. Yet as Ashlee Vance points out even the people who ended up on the wrong side of the fence respected Elon and now understand that it was all part of the bigger picture. I've talked to plenty of founders, arguably not on the same scale as Elon is, yet they all have an aggressive side to them. That's what it takes to get those companies going.

His goals for Tesla and SpaceX might have sounded lavish, which is obvious now, but everyone agrees that when he set out to build them he had a deep understanding of what he was doing. To most people, talking about Mars is the same as talking about unicorns. It's just venting, they don't think about it as being even remotely possible. In a true sense of the word, I think Elon Musk really believes in getting people to other planets. It's hard not to sound cliche, but going back to Steve Jobs famous TV advertisement, The Crazy Ones, which said, "the ones who are crazy enough to think that they can change the world, are the ones who do." There are a handful of people matching this description today, Elon Musk is undeniably one of them.

> Between Google and Apple's introduction of the iPhone in 2007, there's a wasteland of ho-hum companies. In the years that followed, the goal went from taking huge risks to create new industries and grand new ideas, to chasing easier money by entertaining consumers and pumping out simple apps and advertisements.

Elon rightfully says that too many people are locked on to building apps, without any purpose. I wouldn't go as far as to say that those startups are taking the easy route, but truly disrupting the world takes more than an app.

> "To me, Elon is the shining example of how Silicon Valley might be able to reinvent itself and be more relevant than chasing these quick IPOs and focusing on getting incremental products out," said Edward Jung, a famed software engineer and inventor. He said, "Those things are important, but they are not enough. We need to look at different models of how to do things that are longer term in nature and where the technology is more integrated."

There is no doubt Elon is in the process of disrupting not just product categories or industries, but instead how large groups of people, eventually the world, go about their lives. That is achieved through attention to detail, hiring the best people and going against the grain.

A lot of the stories in the book are already pretty well publicized, but reading in detail about building X.com, SpaceX, Tesla, and SolarCity is fascinating. If anything he is someone to look up to if you are engineer.
